# 1.2 Defining and Initilizing a Data Object

In order to define an `object`, we must give it a name and assign it a data type. Object names can be composed of any combination of letters, numbers, and underscores. It's important to note that uppercase and lowercase letters are distinct. Additionally, object names cannot begin with a number.

Each object belongs to a specific data type.

Taking the example of the `int` type, we can use the following `statement` to define an integer object:

```CPP
int usr_val;
```

You can choose to initialize an object at the time of definition or later. Moreover, multiple objects can be defined in a single declaration statement, separated by commas. For instance:

```CPP
int num_tries = 0, num_right = 0;
```

Furthermore, there's an alternative initialization syntax known as `"constructor syntax"`:

```CPP
int num_tries(0);
```

It's worth noting that the use of the assignment `"="` for initialization carries over from the C language. This approach works fine when objects belong to built-in types or when objects can be initialized with a single value. For example:

```CPP
std::string sequence_name = "Fibonacci";
```

However, this method becomes problematic when an object requires multiple initial values. For instance, in the case of the complex number class in the standard library, initialization requires two initial values—one for the real part and another for the imaginary part. This led to the introduction of the "constructor initialization syntax" to handle multi-value initialization:

```CPP
#include <complex>
std::complex<double> pure(0, 7);
```

The angle brackets appearing after complex indicate that complex is a `template class`.

Here are the commonly used `escape sequence` in C++, along with their representations:

- \n - Newline

- \t - Tab

- \\" - Double quotation mark

- \\' - Single quotation mark

- \\\ - Backslash

- \b - Backspace

- \r - Carriage return

- \f - Form feed

- \v - Vertical tab

- \a - Alert (bell)

- \0 - Null character

These escape sequence are used to represent special characters within strings and character literals in C++ programs.

## Using const

The `const` keyword in C++ is used to declare constants and to indicate that a variable's value should not be modified after it has been initialized. It is a type qualifier that can be applied to variables, pointers, function parameters, and member functions. When used with variables, const ensures that the value of the variable remains unchanged throughout its scope, helping to prevent unintended modifications.

For example, declaring a variable as const int indicates that the value of the variable cannot be modified once it's assigned. Similarly, using const with pointers indicates that the value being pointed to cannot be modified through that pointer. This helps in writing safer and more predictable code by enforcing immutability where needed.

Additionally, const is often used in function declarations to indicate that a function does not modify the state of the object it's called on. It also helps in enabling optimizations by allowing the compiler to make certain assumptions about the immutability of data.

In summary, the const keyword in C++ serves as an important tool to create constants, ensure immutability, and enhance code clarity by explicitly specifying the intention of not modifying certain values or states.


